So, in regard to identifying the drawings for the windows, on one visit to London, I was talking to John Dreyfus in his office at the Monotype Corporation, and he
said something like, of course you've been in contact with Souter, haven't you?
And I asked, who is Souter?
And he nearly fell off the chair.
He explained that Yale University Press was going to publish Souter's two-volume work
on the stained glass of William Morris and his circle.
A professor of art history at the University of Manchester in England.
A twenty-year on-and-off project of his, trying to do the definitive record of all the stained glass work of Morris and Company.
And John Dreyfus already knew of all this material that I had.
So I immediately wrote to Souter, and he responded, please send anything.
And I sent two cardboard cartons of Xeroxes of all 700 drawings.
All 140 of the drapery studies.
Did you do all the Xeroxes yourself?
Yeah.
Oh.
Because he wouldn't trust anybody else.
I just had to take it for the tape.
Xeroxes of these two handwritten catalogs, Morris and Company No.
1, catalog of designs used for windows.
executed from June 1876 to June 30, 1916, and then from June 1, 1916, and it ends in 1940 when they closed.
But they kept opening in just two journals.
Yes.
And then in 19...
I think it's archival material, isn't it?
Yes, yes, yes.
It's major.
And here it tells when Duncan Durrell wishes to inform past patrons and messers Morris & Company, Art Workers Limited, now in process of voluntary liquidations and previously trading at 17 St.
George Street, Hannibal Square, London,
that he has purchased the stained glass department of the company, together with the sole rights of reproduction of all cartoons designed by the founder of the business, William Morris, currently the poet and artist, Sir Edward Byrne Jones and H. Durrell, E-E-A-R-E.
With his steadfast intention to maintain the high traditions associated with Morris, stained glass, and he hopes to be favored, S-A-D-O-U-R-E-B, your continued patronage
I wish it to assure you of the same regard for your future requirements as it has been his privilege to bestow upon your inquiries of the need in orders received during many past years, Second World War, 1939 to 1945."
See, no work done then.
But then, starting in 1945, or 1946, until 1965, last work by Duncan Darrell.
I've never read other than in Suter's book from this source that the company went on.
So let's say, let's point out that using these books, which Suter obtained from you, he was actually able to determine the very important scholarly information and the preparation of these books.
That is part of the significance, I think, of what you should show us.
a whole bunch of information that Suter was totally unaware of him on Windows.
And as Suter says in his introduction here someplace—yeah.
Oh, first I have to say, when Suter got all this stuff, and then I shortly after went to visit Suter at his place there,
It was one of those mixed blessings, where here he had galley proofs.
His book was finished.
So, as he says here, in the last stages of February, after the text of Israel was already in the podium, I have received a great deal of most valuable, most generally spent photographs of his unrighteous collection of original documents, drawings, sketchbook writing.
Let me write down.
I'm going to have to pull that out of a copy of that.
But he's telling you that he had to revise the book.
Oh, then, to show how the problem he had.
Horrible.
But can you imagine the scholarly disaster if it hadn't been included?
How in your own mind did he make so many mistakes?
Oh, he looked for more material.
He actually went to the widow's house.
All this stuff was up in the attic.
But in their conversation, I don't know what she was like or what he said, she didn't say she had any of this stuff there.
He was that close to it.
He was downstairs and this was up there.
Now, what's intrigued... He must have been thrilled that he heard about you both.
Finally, yeah.
Because, just to give you an idea of the amount of work he had to do, you just try opening any page, and you'll find a reference like this.
The sketch design for the Annunciation 29, it belongs to Mr. S.L.
Berger.
He used one line, sooner used one line for each drawing in the index of owners of cartoons and drawings.
And...
Oh, my God.
All he could do, in order not to add too many pages, he just went back and forth.
S.L.
Berger, let's let the record show, is about two full columns of this large coffee table-sized book.
How many would you say there are there?
Are there 140?
Or is it more than that?
No, it's got to be more...
Wait a minute.
No, no, you're more than two full columns.
You're close to three full columns.
Right, closer to three full columns.
Because I thought it ended up there.
No, no, it ends over here.
It's three full columns.
Yeah.
Several hundred.
How do you feel when you see that?
You must feel pretty good, though.
Oh, sure.
Is this what it's all about?
Is this a secondary thing for you, or is this a primary thing of building such a collection?
Well, it's tremendous to realize that this is, in fact, a definitive piece of work that probably cannot be improved on.
And it was impossible to produce without reference... Without all of this material.
...to our collection.
Yeah.
The incorporation of all of this information.
See, because what he got from the...
Look how detailed those things.
Oh, yeah.
See, in these little diamond-shaped things, there's a series of examples when you view the drawings.
And what we're looking at are—these are scale drawings.
They're more than drawings.
They're actually— These are referred to as sketch designs, and they are prepared to get approval before going
to the full-size state of stained-glass windows.
Stained-glass windows.
In other words, you, the church committee, come in, or, okay, let's... I'm just looking at one in Bloomsbury, by the way, 26 Queens Square, Bloomsbury.
Here's one for a church in East Windsor, September 14th, 1869.
So they would make the stained-glass windows for the churches.
Oh, sure.
They would make fractions.
Is he a businessman, entrepreneur, artist?
He made money out of everything.
I mean, was this the goal for him, do you think?
No.
He was a creative genius.
He had managers who used to, Morris would drive him crazy because he would be doing so many things instead of finishing up this thing on schedule and this thing.
How, if you were asked to describe him, what is he?
What is William Morris?
What was he?
What are these now?
These are photographs of the full-size cartoons.
So now you, the church committee, have come in.
We go through this.
First of all, you tell me you've got— Oh, this is just close to where I take some notes.
This is an old version of a loose-leaf notebook.
Yeah.
I refer to it as a photographic file of the—
existing of the already-designed cartoons.
They're photographs of cartoons, of designs that have been used.
Now, you come in and say you've got a three-light window.
These are referred to as lights.
And so we'll go through this.
and pick out, well, maybe if we use that figure, and that figure, and that figure, and you say, yeah, that sounds right, because we're Saint Somebody, and that should fit in to something.
And they would prepare this, incorporating those designs for you to agree on, and give you an idea of the color.
You know what?
It's almost like customizing out of a preset cast, in a way.
Is that right?
They're going to take a suit off the shelf, and the guy's going to bring it in a little bit, but... Exactly.
Except they would photographically enlarge and diminish to fit your window.
So they work with the architect, obviously, too.
Sure.
Now, you see this figure here?
Yeah.
There it is there.
And you see this one here?
But here it was done
many years before, like 22 years earlier, was when it was first designed.
But they decided they'd like that same subject.
So they would change the colors to suit the color groupings.
So this you might say is a sample.
So they would have to work with both of these books.
No.
No, they would work with this book, and they would prepare this drawing before you.
I get it.
You being the committee from Ravendale Church.
Okay, which is what we're looking at, Ravendale's church.
1877.
Right.
So you decided, neat, except I don't like all these diamonds, let's put in something.
That's what they did.
So you can see they did.
They did, they changed it a little bit.
Right.
So this is kind of like what your salesman would take.
I hate to use that, but your representatives would take and would sit down with these books and would custom design you a window.
Now here's what's important.
You might say, oh, well, I want a first edition.
Well, okay.
If you want, we'll design a new design for you.
That's going to cost so much more and take longer.
But to make you feel better, Morris would say, every window is a first edition, because in every case, we go back to the original cartoon.
That's true.
The first execution of it was from the cartoon, and the fifth time you use it, you go back to the cartoon.
The work is exquisite.
Is this watercolor, by the way?
Yeah, these are all watercolor.
And look at putting in the pattern on every one of these diamonds.
They didn't just... These were skilled artists.
Do we know who any of these artists are?
Are they signed?
No, they're not signed, but I can sort of recognize.
This is Ford and Alex Brown.
I've gotten to know some of their styles.
This is Bryn Jones.
They didn't finish a new idea.
You've got the idea.
Take it back to your parish.
Do you think it's done like this today?
First of all, there aren't that many windows being made.
I was going to say, but that's not done.
Wow.
And this all came from the archives?
Yes.
Did you have any idea what you were getting when you bought the archives?
Just from a typewritten list, but I haven't seen it.
Yeah, but you were figuring it's got to be great stuff.
Did you think, well, there must be a lot of junk in there, but so what?
No.
Everything was important.
Everything's good.
Right.
No, they didn't know how to do so.
He said they didn't know how to do so.
Yeah, but a lot of it must have been bills of lading or receipts from the, uh... Well, I wish they had happened.
But the Victoria and Albert already has loads of that.
Well, what?
They have that and they don't have this.
I mean, how do you figure that?
Well, when the company closed, I figured, first of all, they had a sale of a lot of documents, and a lot of people bought
maybe not so much documents, but they bought big pieces of fabric, big whatever was sort of there in stock.
And a lot of those have ended up after Victoria and Albert and other places.
And the cartoons have been sold over a long period of time.
No.
This is a record of the sale of all the cartoons.
Mr. Holliday bought a hell of a lot of them.
Are you collecting William Morris as an individual, or William Morris as an industry that he created?
All of the above.
Anything to do.
But they are all equally important to him.
It is, because the whole thing is the creation of William Morris.
Is this correct?
Yeah.
Or if he didn't do it,
Personally, he's the driving force about something that's better than others.
The original drawing, when he was designing the Troy-type, is a pretty special piece.
This is our telelector says?
This is Morris designing an alphabet for the Comscott Press, namely the Troy-type.
C-R-O-Y.
C-R-O-Y, because it was meant
This is in Morris's hand?
Yes.
It was meant for the histories.
Is that better there?
It wasn't bad actually.
Sandy, will you say...
are some things better than others as far as collecting.
A drawing of Morris designing the type is about as good as it can be.
But things like this, the layout of a page from the Kelmscott Press, is pretty great.
This did not come with the archives?
No.
There was no Kelmscott Press.
There were some Kelmscott Press books.
in the archives, but there was no Count Scott Press ephemeral.
Or this, the first impression of engravings for the first page of Chaucer.
Some slight alterations were made before printing, signed by W.H.
Hooper, who did the engraving.
And then... This is a proof page?
That's a proof.
See, then here's a proof of the text
to fit in that page.
And they were exploring.
And here you see there are five lines.
This couple is split here.
Here's a photo.
Now, would this represent several passes to the press to get that in there?
How would they find it?
Yeah.
How would they maybe not?
Can't be sure.
You see, the fact
The fact that they did the actual printing from electro types, which are zinc blocks made from the wood blocks, so that this big, a wood block, being printed 425 paper copies and 13 vellum copies, plus all the mistake copies, the block probably wouldn't survive.
And Morris had to be convinced that he couldn't tell the difference between printing from the wood block or printing from the zinc block.
And they were able to prove it to him by doing the same example of each, and he agreed.
So that's why this whole thing was likely a zinc block.
made from all the separate wood blocks.
And this is still metal type, which would be separate, a second printing.
That's my guess.
It would have to be.
And then they would, yeah, I hadn't stopped to wonder how that would happen.
Then they would have to come back again and print the red.
We're talking several passes to it, and the registration has to be absolutely precise every time through.
So let's say there's one, two, three.
Then on the verso, there's at least four for the type and five for the red on that side.
You have five opportunities to screw up each page.
Every page in the book.
And if you didn't have a border, then you'd have only four chances to screw up each page.
Unbelievable.
There's the bunch that did it.
That's the crew of the Tom Scott Press, and that's Morris' daughter.
Look at Morris.
He's a wonderful one.
Yeah.
But he looks like he's 82 there, and he died at 62.
How old is he there?
He's probably sixty, maybe sixty.
There's one woman in the crowd.
That's Mary Morris, his daughter.
And how significant was she to the— Well, at the Morrison Company, she was in charge of all the embroidery departments.
She designed and executed— Really?
Yeah.
Good.
It's nice to see women were actively involved in his operation.
Sure, he had lots of women working for him.
Mrs. Holliday was his major embroideress.
I have a lot of correspondence.
Sid wanted to publish that.
Yeah, it was a separate book, The Correspondence of Morris to Mrs. Holliday.
And he actually did all the typescripts again, and then I don't know whether he was going to get Kim Merker to do it and to tell him.
printing the Chaucer.
That's a very historic moment in the history of printing, isn't it?
Sure it is.
Do you know who those individuals are?
Probably one of them is Bowdoin.
I'm not sure who's the other guy.
That looks like you're pressed, doesn't it?
Yeah.
See, it's the same design, just very big.
But here, look at this use of photography, trying a smaller size than they finally decided on.
And then I have another ... See, here's where it was designed first.
Morris tried setting a column for the Chaucer when he realized it was going to take about four volumes.
Then he had it recast in what's referred to now as the Chaucer size.
Same design, just smaller.
There's no way to calculate how much work went into the creation of this one book, right?
Oh, God.
And we're talking about how many copies?
$4.25 printed on paper and $13 printed on double.
Was he doing this?
And of course, what did they sell for when they were originally?
Twenty pounds.
Not in the pigskin, but in the ordinary buying.
See, that was a lot of money.
So the idea was to make some money on this.
This was not— No, he started out—let's say the first intention when he said, let's see if printing can be done properly.
He meant to print 20 copies to give to his friends.
And word got out that Morris was getting involved in printing, and he was swamped with... So he had no problems placing these days.
So the first book he printed 200 copies.
It went up.
And today's jargon, we might say they were probably fully subscribed prior to publication.
Here, let's... Oh, is this it?
Oh, okay.
We are carrying here.
Why don't you tell us, Sandy, what you've got here.
Well, this is one of... ...feeling.
Oh, God.
You don't mind if I take a whiff of it?
Yeah, what I like.
To me, it's all the senses are pleased.
This is one of 46 copies of the paper copy
but with the white pigskin binding designed by Morris and executed at the Doves Binary by Douglas Cockrell.
He did all forty-six of the paper copies and two of the vellums.
So there are actually forty-eight white pigskin bindings.
It's in exquisite condition.
Silver clasps, blind stamps,
You don't buy any blind stamps?
That means there's no gold.
There's no inlays.
It's just the one piece of leather, impressed.
There's no gold or red or anything.
Can you fix that?
No way.
You wouldn't try?
Nobody's ever come up with a way to do it.
I don't mean to fix it, but to stop the chemical action.
You couldn't treat it?
I've never come across anybody's ... What's that little symbol?
That's the first signature.
Oh.
and then it gets bound by the signature notes.
Oh, God, that's gorgeous.
Look at the type biting through the page.
Well, you see it's all dampened paper when they print.
The works of Jeffrey.
Oh, my goodness.
You're looking at it.
Tell us what you have, what we're open to now.
You tell them.
What do you see?
Well, I see the title page and the works of Jeffrey Chaucer.
Now newly imprinted, here beginneth the tales of Canterbury, and first the prologue thereof.
And I have to get a photograph of this, with Sandy opening it.
F-R-O-I-S-S-A-R-T.
this was something that morris was had in the planning stages he did indeed we'll begin at the prologue of sir s-y-r j-o-h-a-n frost of the chronicles of france england i-n-g-l-a-n-d-e and other places adjoining a-d-j-o-y-n-y-n-g-e the first chapters now this was
Something he planned to do similar to the kind of original?
There would have been a companion in size and even a further advance of enrichment.
And what you have here are probably more rare than the ... Oh, right.
But the book was never printed.
No, but this is printed on vellum is why it looks so smart.
But the thing of it is, he died before the book was printed, so these were just things that they were working on before the book was ever printed.
You're looking at pages of a book that never was finished, is that right?
Yes.
And that's the Doheny sale that we're looking at.
And what I want to do is see what a page like this is.
Oh, I'd like to see that myself.
Let's see if I can find this somewhere.
Did you ever meet the Countess?
No.
No, I didn't.
Come with all the other stuff.
No, no.
There we go.
These are just pages.
There it is.
This is item 2346 in the Doheny.
Hold this while I make that count.
2346 Doheny, because I got the price for it.
It only brought $3,300.
I would have expected much more.
Would you?
For one page, though.
It's not bad.
Not too bad.
Would you call that a leaf?
Let's see.
They call it two conjugate leaves.
Two conjugate leaves.
That's right.
That's pretty nice.
They usually tell you who bought it.
Who bought that?
No, it says anonymous.
And that's very like the weather, Android weather.
See, because he bought
Here, now you will see the opening.
Here is the title page of the Aeneid.
Actual sign.
Now, this is number... That's 2370.
2370.
Now, this was a whole book.
To bring us out a book that wasn't William Wise's library.
It's our one and only incunable.
Really?
The title is Speculum Morale, the Code of Ethics, printed by Kohlberger in Nuremberg in 1485.
So it is now 505 years old.
And in accordance with Morris's instructions, as you'll see on a letter that's pasted in, it was sold to Robert Steele
rather than it being sold off as part of the library.
And again, you, Mr. Opportunistic guy.
Oh, look at that.
Oh, that's a bigger book.
This is a folio.
What would you call this?
Oh, maybe elephant folio.
Yeah, elephant folio, of course, is not a block.
That's too big.
It's a folio.
Yeah, it's a folio.
Actually, any big book is a folio.
Okay.
Now, the thing that's important, this has a contemporary binding from when it was printed.
It's been repaired, of course.
But it was very dry, and I started putting the stuff in there.
And I started noticing this particular thing, and I wondered, where had I ever seen the...
There it is.
Identical.
I've made robbings of both.
What we're talking about is that this is an incunable.
I-N-C-U-N-A-D-L-E in it.
And we're looking at a large book that is more than 500 years.
505.
505 years old.
And it has a little design, circular design.
It's a rose.
A stylized rose.
This was in the library of William Morris.
And Sandy is trying to, I guess, discern why— Preserve the leather.
Yeah, preserve the leather.
And focused on, why did that design look familiar?
And what did you— And it finally dawned on me, and it got this out.
Then— Got this out being— Got it off the shelf.
The Chaucer we're talking about.
The Chaucer.
The white pigskin binding designed by Morris.
Then it dawned on me, if Morris lifted that,
Maybe he lifted other parts of this design from other books that he had had in his life as a scholar.
So I went to the Morgan Library that has the majority of what was his library at the time he died, and took three afternoons there and looked at 22 blind stamp bindings and found this diamond, found this.
What is this?
this little flower figure.
And Paul Needham had already noted this three-vein leaf design was the same on a Latin Bible from Morris's Library, owned by the Metropolitan Museum.
But then we found, or I found,
Paul Needham took photos of each of these things, this little square, and then the diamond is used to embroider.
So that was fun.
Had Paul found any of these prior to yours?
No.
The only one he noticed was the three-veined leaf.
You know, there's a monograph in this for somebody, isn't there?
Yeah.
It should be.
Well, actually, I've given all that information to Marion Tidcombe, who
I think she works not the British Library.
It should go to Robert Steele.
That's a cultural press.
Well, he says here, he wants this book to go to Robert Steele.
Yes.
You know what?
Here's a copy.
There's something inside here.
This is a great document.
Evaluation of the Library of William Morris, 1896.
So at the time he died, Copper explains the whole thing.
F.S.
Ellis did this handwritten bibliography of the whole library.
These are the books that he read and he owned.
He owned four typographic, let's say.
Has the library for the most quite been dispersed?
No, most of it is here.
Could you just read that?
OK.
This evaluation of the principal books in the Library of William Morris was made soon after his death by Frederick Startridge Ellis, his old friend and former publisher and my co-executor in the Morris estate.
The prices fixed was as near as possible those paid by Morris.
The pencil editions were made by Charles Fairfax Murray, who at one time contemplated
carrying and buying the library.
The actual purchaser, I can't figure it out.
Through Pickering and Chateau, C-H-A-T-T-O, was a Mr. Richard Bennett, who sold a large portion at South of East in December 1898 and sold the remainder to J. Pierpont Morgan of New York, whose catalogs they are fully described.
The price paid by Mr. Bennett was 18,000 pounds.
That's a lot of money.
That's a big box.
But the thing we want to do is to stay alive.
I'm looking.
See, this is so much.
Oh, my God.
Did you ever see anything so beautiful?
The double columns.
It's exquisite.
And the proportion of the mark.
No, this is super patient.
It's incredible patient.
500 years.
so he was just looking at a beautifully printed book with the hand rubricated initials so it's more than the binding it was also for the type of layout proportions the opening you think this is he used this as a what's the word not a primer but uh a model source a model a model and oh
We call it an illuminated letter, I guess.
That's a hell of a nice illuminated letter.
I'll take a picture of that, I think.
See, and it once was in a Capuchin Monastery in Vanburg, 1632.
He said you've reached the stage where you can't afford the super unique, like $1.2 and $3 and $4 million.
That's it.
So I don't need a lot more stuff.
But by the same token, you must have satisfaction in knowing that you got these stuff before these other people discovered them, right?
I can't believe what we've got here.
I couldn't afford to buy what we've got here because of the prices.
Morris was just like with the Art Nouveau.
Nobody really gave much of a damn about Morris in 1860 and 1965.
I told you I was wrong.
This is a manuscript.
You have more letters.
Yeah.
These are all William Morris.
I got a few Xeroxes where I couldn't get the letter.
I mean, you think you have all of them here?
No.
No, I have a few zeroes.
I have actually a lot of zeroes.
Are these arranged chronologically?
Yes, chronologically.
How many?
There are over a hundred.
They're substantive.
They're discussing... Oh, yeah.
Now, here's the translation of one of the Icelandic sagas with...
The original manuscript on 22 leaves in the autograph of Eriker Magnusson.
M-A-G-N-U-S-S-O-N.
Filled with corrections and alterations in the handwriting of William Morris.
Also, two verses of poetry in his autograph.
E-R-I-K-R.
E-I-R-I-K-R.
It's a screwy spell.
E-I-R.
Here, wait till I... No, don't bother.
That's okay.
That's all right.
I think that I can ascertain that myself.
All right.
Everything is, too.
E-I-R-I-K-R-M-A-G-N-U-S-S-O-N with an accent over the second I in Erica and over the U.
and Magnuson, coming down upper right to left.
That's the 2,102 books so far.
That's from the computer.
That's the catalog, 2,200 books, which you are entering in the computer.
And these are the printouts?
These are the printouts.
You see, Magnuson sort of did what he considered a good, straightforward translation.
Morris had other ideas.
Heavily annotated.
And in some ways the whole paragraph was taken out.
He did everything himself, didn't he?
That's why he learned the language, so he could put his own, tell it his own way.
I wonder why he was so fixed on this particular story.
Oh, he did all of the Norse.
Here.
I won't bring him here.
Just come and look.
Right.
McHale, who was married to Byrne Jones's daughter, wrote the first biography, and he had all the documents from both families, from the Morris family and the Byrne Jones family, and they asked him to do it.
He was a classical teacher, Greek and Latin, at Cambridge.
So he did the two volumes.
I'll have to consult it, obviously.
It's going to have to be... Well, you just... I mean, you've given us a tour through... You said earlier that this... I guess I'm still interested in the passion for this.
It started with books, by the way.
I think we should point that out.
And it's become everything.
And when you began collecting the books,
Did you feel you knew the man at all?
Where do you begin to know the man?
I guess that's one way to get into it.
The passion for Morris.
Why just Morris?
This has really been a very focused collection.
It's important to think of him
for what he did as an individual, but it's equally important to realize he had such an inspiring energy that he stimulated this circle of artists to do great things that they wouldn't have done otherwise.
There's a great quotation by Berne Jones when Morris died.
It shouldn't be paraphrased, but it's to the effect that Morris was the strength, the tower, the banner.
He was the whole sort of leader in the ultimate sense.
that these guys followed and did more than they were capable of doing.
So it's more than just Morris individual.
It's Morris and his circle of people.
And I think he made a point of that.
In the minute book—see, at first it was called Morris, Marshall, Faulkner and Company.
The minute book—I can mention this to you upstairs—he agreed that the names of the designers of cartoons be withheld from the public.
See, this followed after saying, agreed that Rossetti should make a drawing of the crucifixion at the Dedicoke window.
Jones, do one of the nativity for the sidelight.
Morris, one of the resurrection for the other.
And this is funny.
And that Jones price be five pounds, but that Morris only have three pounds.
See, Morris was taking a minute, so he was putting a little jab in there.
Well, why did he want the anonymity, do you think?
Because he wanted it to be the firm.
They used that expression.
The firm was this Morris Marshall Company.
And I think he was proud of the fact that.
You know, I, by definition almost, is the expression of one individual.
Yeah?
They say that the only time anything has ever been done well by a committee, certainly in writing, is the King James Bible.
Okay.
Yet here you have really artistic expression by a group that is insisting on anonymity, and they want the product of the group.
I guess maybe this is something that Morris was passionate about?
This is what he wanted.
Did he think he was producing art?
Did he realize he was producing art by just beautiful things?
Was it craft to him, or was it art?
How's that?
You hit on the real crux of what Morris was concerned about, was to cease having a separation of art and craft.
That's why I included that little quote about the artist is the craftsman, and the craftsman is the artist.
And even though Morris would do the design, as you quote, he would rely
on the tapestry weaver to design the detail of the Mille Fleur flowers and select the colors.
And especially with Mrs. Holliday, the embroiderer, he left all kinds of things up for hair to do within his framework of design.
So he didn't have an ego trip of
But he was first among equals, do you think?
I'm not sure what that really says.
We're all equal, but I'm more equal than the rest of you.
I'm not sure whether he would... Well, why did he insist on controlling everything?
It's almost contradictory.
Oh, to make certain that the result was going to be as good as it could be.
That was primary.
The final product had to speak for itself.
He wanted you to be happy to do it over as many times as it took to get it just right.
All these trial designs where
It's too close and it's too far apart.
Oh, now that's just right.
But who was the final average of what he was doing?
See, and his compositor started to complain.
We've done this four times.
That's right, I'm paying you.
Got to get it just right.
And little by little, they saw that it was worth doing.
Was he possessed?
Okay.
Now, I've got a theory about that that I haven't read, anyway.
The terrible timing of the young Byrne Jones and Morris becoming friends with Rossetti.
Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who was, you might say, fifteen years older.
He was the instigator and the leader of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
So, here we are, fifteen years later, when the Brotherhood had pretty well dissolved, that Morris and Berne Jones become aware of Rossetti's writings and his paintings.
And Rossetti gets the commission to do the murals in the Oxford debating hall.
And Rossetti hires, that's in quote, Byrne Jones and Morris and Val Princep, a couple of the other young guys, to help them do these frescoes.
Now, let's back up.
For 11 years up to this point, Rossetti had been living with his model, Elizabeth Siddle.
And she was frantically eager to get him to marry her.
And she was getting sicker and sicker, you know, whatever.
And so everybody pressured Rosetti, marry her already, which he did.
No sooner had that happened than here's Rosetti with this commission to do in Oxford, the murals, and
they meet at a theater, or they see at a theater, the woman that Rossetti spotted as being the identity of the pre-Raphaelite woman incarnate.
So he introduces himself and asks her to pose for these murals, and he's fallen head over heels in love with her, and she with him.
But because of this recent wedding, marriage, it ended up with Morris asking her to marry, which she agreed to because it was the only way for her to get out of this dire poverty that she had grown up in and was living in in Oxford.
And here Morris, you might say, sent her to finishing school and— When he married her?
Oh, yes.
With a husband and wife?
Oh, yes, and they had two daughters, May and Jenny.
But here he installed her before they got married.
He installed her with a family, with servants, so she could learn how to run a household with servants.
And the whole thing, he turned her into a suitable wife of William Morris, who had grown up in this high level of high standards.
Well, no sooner had they had the two daughters in the first two years of their marriage, but she takes the kids and goes to live with Rosetti.
Or no, wait a minute, there's an interim.
She starts getting together with Rosetti, and that drives Rosetti's wife to commit suicide.
Then she moves in with the kids, and Morris says to his friends,
I've got to be manly about this.
We mustn't have a scandal."
It was very British.
Unthinkable, exactly.
So he wrote to her almost every day and became the visitor and the kids there.
Well, my theory is he was so full of fury, and rather than directing the fury and throttling all of them, he
It just was driven.
That's what reminded me.
He was driven.
You said, was he driven?
You think it was because of the marital with the triangle.
Was he aware of Rossetti's, of the obsession that these two had for each other when he married her?
I mean, did he know about it?
He figured, hey, I'm William Morris.
You'll fall for me, right?
Sure.
It doesn't happen.
I think that could account for how does— There's a theory.
Is this based on anything that you have, that you've read?
Well, all the statements I made about what they each did is all published.
But nobody's ever extrapolated those events into why— How he channeled the— Here, when Morris died, and they asked the doctor what did he die of, he answered, he died
of being William Morris and doing the work of ten people, because he literally did totally exhaust himself.
Worked himself to death.
And that's why at 62, he lived in 82.
You think if the wife hadn't left him, he wouldn't have been William Morris?
I'd love to know.
He would have been pretty impressive because before he met her, he was writing poetry out of the blue.
He's long as a freshman at Oxford.
The rest of the guys couldn't imagine.
How could he do that?
Did that end his relationships with women when she left him?
I mean, did he really celibate one woman?
As far as I know, he was physically celibate.
But he was deeply in love with Berne Jones' wife, and that's why he did.
I don't think he ever touched her.
Victorians, huh?
Who could believe it?
I don't think he ever touched her.
But he did those two manuscripts as gifts to her.
You're pointing, as he says.
You do that for a woman you love.
We're not a casual acquaintance.
But I don't think he ever touched her.
Now, another woman who was very important to him was Aglaia Coronio.
And I have 35 letters he wrote to her.
How do you spell her name?
Aglaia.
A-G-L-A-I-A C-O-R-O-N-I-O.
And she was
It came from a Greek family, the Ionides family, who was one of the major patrons of Morris and Company.
Morris designed the whole interior for the Ionides house, and Agileo, I think, was one of the daughters or cousins he met through Ionides.
So, to answer your question of being celibate, I choose to believe physically, yes.
But mentally, spiritually, whatever you want to call it, he was deeply in love with these other two women, I don't know.
It's a work of love.
It is.
Absolutely.
Well, the title, the book of verse, comes from the Rubioff, you know, a loaf of bread, a book of verse, and the... That's right.
And it's pretty Freudian.
Freud would sit down.
I mean, you would never do this post-Freud.
You know, at the time of life.
Okay.
You'd be self-conscious.
I think you said, my God, what are they going to read into this?
Everybody's going to know that.
I mean, we can see what William Morris has done to your life.
Tell me what it's done personally.
Oh, well, it's made retirement.
I'm the luckiest guy in the world to have something that keeps getting better every day.
Are you learning things about them that you do?
All the time.
People are, well, partly from what I'm, the best thing about cataloging, remember those books I snuck in onto the shelf 20 years ago?
I haven't looked at them since until now when I take them off the shelf to catalog.
So instead of taking five minutes to catalog a book, I start looking at the pages.
I didn't know what I was buying or where it related.
What is it to hold and to feel holographic manuscripts?
That's the greatest.
Let me show you the most recent thing.
This blows my mind.
I got this gift about a month ago.
So the collection is constantly being added to, I think we should point out, and he's taking it out of the mileage.
You've got to feel the real thing.
Let's put this pen in here.
Yeah.
That's good.
Hold that piece of paper.
Read the note there.
This is done by William Morris while working on a... While... While working on a... While serving.
While serving on a committee of the SPAB.
on the evening of 31 March 1892, Zachary Turner.
This is the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings, which was started by William Morris.
And what it shows is one, two, three, four, perhaps a dozen doodles, not unlike the calligraphy that Sandy Berger did while sitting on the Berkeley or whatever it is.
Planning Commission.
There are residences there.
But you see, this is at the time of the Kelmscott press, and he's doing ornaments.
And you just got this.
Did the person who sold this to you know that these were Kelmscott press ornaments?
No, he just did.
How did he describe it?
Original pencils are done.
But you knew instantly these were Kelm Scott Plus ornaments.
Well, it's the right date, and they sure look like a lot of these ornaments.
I got this the 23rd of May.
I feel it.
I'm talking about what it's like to feel the original piece.
And it's got swudges on the back.
But he kept it, didn't he?
Zachary did.
He was a painter.
Oh, so this is, oh, in other words, this is Factory Turner who wrote this.
Oh, he wrote that.
He's identifying it as.
And so Morris just left it.
Oh, of course.
He left it or threw it.
And this guy just slammed it, right?
Oh, yeah.
No dummy.
Would you have turned ahead and signed that?
Would you have recognized that as a work of Morris?
I'd like to think so.
I would like to think I would think that has Morris' characteristics.
Yeah, I've got enough other doodles of his to say, yeah, that's close enough that I would say so.
So, 19—how long has he been retired?
You say it's been—it's made retirement, uh— Eight years.
So, at that point— Oh, I also wanted to ask, for all the period I was working,
It made weekends the greatest.
You'd come down here.
Sure.
I'd come back here Thursday night, play golf Friday morning, and then have Friday afternoon, Saturday, and Sunday any time I could squeeze away from chores.
Immerse yourself.
Immerse myself.
And you know the men.